Update record names as reserved words/variables and new record definition syntax (#64)
erlang/eep: eeps/eep-0072.md

    Author: Jesse Gumm <ja(at)gumm(dot)io>
    Status: Draft
    Type: Standards Track
    Created: 08-Oct-2024
    Post-History:
****
EEP 72: Reserved words and Variables as record names, and enhancement to definition syntax
----

Abstract
========

> This EEP loosens some of the restrictions around record names such no longer is
> it necessary to quote record names when those records are named with reserved

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This EEP loosens some of the restrictions around record names to make it
no longer necessary to quote them when they are named with reserved
```

> words (`#if` vs `#'if'`) or words with capitalized first characters (`#Hello`
> vs `#'Hello'`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
words (`#if` vs `#'if'`) or words with capitalized first characters (variable
names, for example `#Hello`￼vs. `#'Hello'`).
```

Reviewer: You have a point. Maybe just "like variable names".  I interpret "atom with variable capitalization" as `'Hello'` because quoting is how to create such an atom.
We should avoid inventing an acronym...

Author: I've updated the phrasing here: https://github.com/erlang/eep/pull/64/commits/dbfb39e626bc930f6378af45c1375c2599955edb

What do you think?

This EEP also proposes to add a new record-like syntax to the record

> definitions (also adopting the above syntactical changes), such that the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
definitions (also adopting the above syntactical changes), so that the
```

following record definitions would all be valid and identical:

```erlang
-record('div', {a :: integer(), b :: integer()}).
-record #'div'{a :: integer(), b :: integer()}.
-record #div{a :: integer(), b :: integer()}.
```

> 

Reviewer: ````suggestion
The latter two are proposed new syntax.  The following would also be valid
and identical since parentheses are optional in attributes:

```erlang
-record 'div', {a :: integer(), b :: integer()}.
-record(#'div'{a :: integer(), b :: integer()}).
-record(#div{a :: integer(), b :: integer()}).
```
````

> Motivation

Reviewer 2: The motivation section covers the reason behind the usage of unquoted "keywords" atoms, but not the eventual benefits from the introduction of the new record syntax. I can see how the latter could be more opinionated than the former. Maybe we should limit this EEP to the usage of unquoted atoms only and, if there's really a benefit from multiple syntaxes for record definitions, have a separate EEP/motivation?

Reviewer: The motivation I'd say is to be able to use the same quoting for record definition as for usage.  Otherwise one would have to know which atoms that has to be quoted in the record definition, which is awkward and error prone, or always quote the atom in the record definition, which is ugly.

But I agree that this should be in the Motivation chapter.

There should also be a motivation for why we want to allow variable names unquoted, and that is for applications such as ASN.1 or Corba that have such name conventions and that now have to quote the record names just like for the `'div'` example.

Separating into two different EEP:s I think would be unfortunate, because we then might get a period of asymmetry when one cannot use the same format in record definition and usage.

That there are so many variants of how to define a record is largely due to the syntax rules for attributes and atom quoting in Erlang.

Maybe we should instead write that the old and the new syntaxes are:

```erlang
-record('div', {a :: integer(), b :: integer()}).
-record #div{a :: integer(), b :: integer()}.
```

and then elaborate that due to parentheses being optional in attributes, and due to that atoms may be quoted even when not needed, these happen to be equivalent, just mentioned for completeness:

```erlang
-record 'div', {a :: integer(), b :: integer()}.
-record(#div{a :: integer(), b :: integer()}).
-record #'div'{a :: integer(), b :: integer()}.
-record(#'div'{a :: integer(), b :: integer()}).
```

at-symbols (`@`) with the first character being a lower-case letter and not one
of the 20+ reserved words), in all contexts can be invoked without the
necessary wrapping quotes. Some examples:

```erlang
foo.
foo_Bar.
'foo-bar'. % still quoted since the term has a non-atomic character in it.
```

Conveniently, this also means that records named with simple atoms can be
invoked and used without having to quote the atoms. For example:

```erlang
-record(foo, {a, b}).

go() ->
    X = #foo{a = 1, b = 2},
    Y = X#foo{a = something_else},
    Z = Y#foo.a,
    ...
```

Unfortunately, that also means that records named with anything that doesn't
fit the "simple atom" pattern must be wrapped in quotes in definition and
usage. For example:

```erlang
-record('div', {a, b}).

go() ->
    X = #'div'{a = 1, b = 2},
    Y = X#'div'{a = something_else},
    Z = Y#'div'.a,
    ...
```

While this approach is consistent with atom usage in the language, for reserved
words, this makes the record syntax *feel* inconsistent if you have a need for
naming a record with a reserved word (or term with a capital first letter).  In
this case, it almost guarantees a user won't use a record named 'if',

> 'recieve', 'fun', etc even though there may very well be a valid use-case for

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
'receive', 'fun', etc even though there may very well be a valid use-case for
```

such a name.  The most common use-case that comes to mind from the Nitrogen Web
Framework.  Since HTML has a `div` tag, Nitrogen (which represents HTML tags
using Erlang records) should naturally have a `#div` record, however, due to

> 'div' being a reserved word, the record `#panel` is used instead to save the
> programmer from having to invoke `#'div'`, which feels unnatural and awkward.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
'div' being a reserved word (the integer division operator), the record `#panel`
is used instead to save the programmer from having to invoke `#'div'`,
which feels unnatural and awkward.
```

    Author: Jesse Gumm <ja(at)gumm(dot)io>
    Status: Draft
    Type: Standards Track
    Created: 08-Oct-2024
    Post-History:
****
EEP 72: Reserved words and Variables as record names, and enhancement to definition syntax
----

Abstract
========

This EEP loosens some of the restrictions around record names to make it
no longer necessary to quote them when they are named with reserved
words (`#if` vs `#'if'`) or words with capitalized first characters (`#Hello`
vs `#'Hello'`).

This EEP also proposes to add a new record-like syntax to the record
definitions (also adopting the above syntactical changes), so that the
following record definitions would all be valid and identical:

```erlang
-record('div', {a :: integer(), b :: integer()}).
-record #'div'{a :: integer(), b :: integer()}.
-record #div{a :: integer(), b :: integer()}.
```

The latter two are proposed new syntax.  The following would also be valid
and identical since parentheses are optional in attributes:

```erlang
-record 'div', {a :: integer(), b :: integer()}.
-record(#'div'{a :: integer(), b :: integer()}).
-record(#div{a :: integer(), b :: integer()}).

> ```

Reviewer: I think the intention to add *one* new format would be better shown by just having `-record('div', {` and `-record #div{` in the first group, and write that due to optional quoting and optional parentheses the second group (of 4) are identical and equivalent.

Author: Yes, that's right - I forgot to adjust this in my round of updates.  I will adjust accordingly.

Usage Syntax Motivation
=======================

Record names are atoms. As such, the current Erlang syntax requires the record
names to be consistent with the rest of the language's use of atoms.

All atoms in Erlang can be denoted with single quotes. Some examples:

For example:
```erlang
'foo'.
'FOO'.
'foo-bar'.
```

But, conveniently, simple atoms (all alphanumeric, underscores (`_`) or
at symbols (`@`) with the first character being a lowercase letter and not one
of the 20+ reserved words), in all contexts can be invoked without the
necessary wrapping quotes. Some examples:

```erlang
foo.
foo_Bar.
'foo-bar'. % still quoted since the term has a non-atomic character in it.
```

Conveniently, this also means that records named with simple atoms can be
invoked and used without having to quote the atoms. For example:

```erlang
-record(foo, {a, b}).

> 

Reviewer: I am trying to squeeze in a capital letter record further down, but is not sure this works out well enough...  It is a suggestion.

```suggestion
-record(bar, {c}).

```

go() ->
    X = #foo{a = 1, b = 2},
    Y = X#foo{a = something_else},

>     Z = Y#foo.a,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Z = #bar{c = Y#foo.a},
```

    ...
```

Unfortunately, that also means that records named with anything that doesn't
fit the "simple atom" pattern must be wrapped in quotes in definition and
usage. For example:

```erlang
-record('div', {a, b}).

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-record('SET', {c}).

```

go() ->
    X = #'div'{a = 1, b = 2},
    Y = X#'div'{a = something_else},

>     Z = Y#'div'.a,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Z = #'SET'{c = Y#'div'.a},
```

using Erlang records) should naturally have a `#div` record, however, due to
'div' being a reserved word (the integer division operator), the record `#panel`
is used instead to save the programmer from having to invoke `#'div'`,
which feels unnatural and awkward.

Further, applications such as ASN.1 and Corba both have naming conventions that
rely heavily on uppercase record names and as such, they currently must be
quoted as well. You can see this in modules in Erlang's
[`asn1`](https://github.com/erlang/otp/blob/OTP-27.1.1/lib/asn1/src/asn1_records.hrl#L35-L39)
application. (The previous link points to some record definitions in `asn1`,
but you can see the usage scattered across a number of modules in the `asn1`
application).

Usage Syntax Specification
==========================

This EEP simplifies the above example by

1. Allowing reserved words and variables to be used without quotes for record
   names, and
2. Simplifying the definition such that the syntax between record definition
   and record usage becomes more consistent.

With the changes from this EEP, the above code becomes:

```erlang
-record('div', {a, b}).

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-record('SET', {c}).

```

go() ->
    X = #div{a = 1, b = 2},
    Y = X#div{a = something_else},

>     Z = Y#div.a,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Z = #SET{c = Y#div.a},
```

quote record name, as the example above demonstrates (repeated here for
convenience):

```erlang
-record('div', {a, b}).

go() ->
    X = #div{a = 1, b = 2},
    Y = X#div{a = something_else},
    Z = Y#div.a,
    ...
```

So whereas the record definition needs to be thought of as `'div'`, the record
usage no longer requires the quoted term 'div', which could certainly lead an
Erlang beginner to wonder why 'div' needs to be quoted in the definition while
other atom-looking terms don't.

Definition Syntax Specification
===============================

Conveniently, there is a rather easy solution, and that's to
allow the record usage syntax to also be used as the record definition.

This EEP also then also adds a new record definition syntax, improving the
symmetry between general record usage and record definition.

The above example can fully then look like the following:

```erlang
-record #div{a, b}.

go() ->
    X = #div{a = 1, b = 2},
    Y = X#div{a = something_else},
    Z = Y#div.a,
    ...
```

Implementation
==============

To update the syntax for using records, we can safely augment the parser to

> change `# atom` to `# record_name` and define `record_name` to be either
> `atom`, `var`, or `reserved_word`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
change its already existing record handling of `'#' atom '{' ... '}'` and `'#' atom '.' atom` into `'#' record_name '{' ... '}'` and `'#' record_name '.' atom`, and define
`record_name` to be `atom`, `var`, or `reserver_word`.
```

To update the record definition syntax, we can simply add a few new

> modifications to the `attribute` Nonterminal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
modifications to the `attribute` Nonterminal to allow `'#' record_name` as name for the `record` attribute, instead of `atom` as for generic attributes.
```

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

As this EEP only adds new syntax, the vast majority existing codebases will
still work, with the possible exception of AST/code analysis tools that are
analyzing code using the new syntax.

Syntax highlighting and code completion tools may need to be updated to support
the new syntax if your code uses the new syntax rules.

Broader Concerns and Points of Discussion
=========================================

While the new definition syntax creates some degree of symmetry around record

> usage, there do remain some concerns and inconsistencies:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
usage, perfect symmetry is impossible to achieve, since a record can always
be handled as the atom tagged tuple it actually is. The question is where
to draw the line where the record's true nature shows, and how hard we
should try to hide it. These are remaining concerns and inconsistencies:

1. Other functions that work with records like `is_record/2` or `record_info/1`
   are not currently covered by any of the syntactical changes in this EEP, and
   as such, it remains necessary to quote record names if they are not simple
   atoms. For example: `is_record(X, div)` would still be a syntax error. So

>    there is still not true 100% symmetry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   there is still not true 100% symmetry.  Note that instead of using the
   `is_record(X, 'div')` guard, matching on `#div{}` is probably more frequently used,
   since it is terser and mostly regarded as more readable.

2. This EEP introducing a new syntax for record definition could potentially
   lead to some to wonder why the language has two rather different syntaxes
   for defining records. Since usage of the syntax for getting, setting,

>    matching, etc (e.g. `#rec{a=x,y=b}`) occurs far more commonly than defining,

Reviewer: I would like to add type definition to this list, since it is another annoying discrepancy that for a type definition of a record type the record syntax is used, but as of today not for the record definition itself.

Author: That's a great point! I'll fit it in somewhere here.

    Author: Jesse Gumm <ja(at)gumm(dot)io>
    Status: Draft
    Type: Standards Track
    Created: 08-Oct-2024
    Post-History:
****
EEP 72: Reserved words and Variables as record names, and enhancement to definition syntax
----

Abstract
========

This EEP loosens some of the restrictions around record names to make it
no longer necessary to quote them when they are named with reserved
words (`#if` vs `#'if'`) or words with capitalized first characters (`#Hello`
vs `#'Hello'`).

This EEP also proposes to add a new record-like syntax to the record
definitions (also adopting the above syntactical changes), so that the

> following record definitions would all be valid and identical:

Reviewer: Nitpick:

```suggestion
following record definitions would be valid and identical:
```

```erlang
-record('div', {a :: integer(), b :: integer()}).
-record #div{a :: integer(), b :: integer()}.
```

The latter one is proposed new syntax.  The following would also be valid

> and identical since parentheses are optional in attributes:

Reviewer: Nitpick:

```suggestion
and identical since parentheses are optional in attributes,
and since atoms may be quoted even when not mandatory:
```
